[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Mankind has been
obsessed with trying to find
Atlantis, that very romantic,
mythical place-- maybe?--
that Plato wrote about
many, many years ago.
Let's check in with
our special guest.
>>Using Plato's description,
some clever deduction,
and a lot of modern
technology, he's
hunting for the lost
city of Atlantis.
In "Meet Me in Atlantis,"
travel writer Mark Adams charts
of course similar to
his New York Times
best seller "Turn
Right at Machu Picchu."
His adventure
started as an effort
to understand why
amateur explorers seek
places that may never be found.
As he crisscrossed the
globe, his interest
turned to obsession for
one of those places--
the lost city that
has eluded so many.
Adams reveals what's known and
unknown about the sunken city
today on "Beyond Belief."
>>NOORY: And Mark Adams
believes that there
might be four
locations for Atlantis,
and we're going
to talk about all
of those on "Beyond Belief."
And Mark, welcome
to the program.
Good to have you with us.
>>MARK ADAMS: Thanks
for having me, George.
>>NOORY: Really
excited about this.
I have been fascinated
with Atlantis
since I was a boy, just trying
to figure out where in the heck
is this place and
what happened to it.
So we'll talk about these
various theories about this.
But when everybody says
you're obsessed with this,
what do they mean by that?
>>ADAMS: Well, I'm a reporter.
Usually what happens
with Atlantis is someone
will come up with
an idea that they've
decided they know where it was.
And then they go and they
construct this theory
based on little bits
of evidence they
find here and there
to prove this idea
that they've already
come up with.
My obsession was to try to
find out once and for all
whether Atlantis was
real, and if it was real,
where was it located.
So I went all the way back to
the original source material
and spent about three years
traveling around the world,
trying to find out what the
truth was about Atlantis.
>>NOORY: Let's go back to
the story created by Plato.
What did he say?
>>ADAMS: Well, every
shred of reliable evidence
that we have for Atlantis
comes from Plato.
Two dialogues that he
wrote around 360 BC.
And basically, he says Atlantis
was a pretty advanced Maritime
culture that existed opposite
the Pillars of Hercules, that
was destroyed in a
fearful day and a night
by earthquakes and floods,
and that is no longer exists.
They were in a war with Athens.
That's the half of the story
that people usually leave out.
And from there, you have to
look at all the other bits
and pieces of information.
There's all sorts of
numbers and locations
in the original Atlanta
story that Plato gives.
And you have to
start the weigh these
to see which of them did he
mean to be taken as fiction,
and which of them did he
mean to be taken as reality.
>>NOORY: Was it an island?
Was it a huge continent?
What was it?
>>ADAMS: It was not a continent.
It was, he says, an island
that had a central capital
city that consisted of rings
of land and water-- concentric
circles.
That would be one of the
things that you really
have to find if you
wanted to find Atlantis.
The continent thing
is something that
came up in the 19th century,
which is when people really
started to think about
searching for Atlantis for real.
So if you were going
to search for Atlantis,
you'd be looking
for an island city
somewhere opposite the
Pillars of Hercules.
>>NOORY: So it was
generally in that region?
>>ADAMS: People have
placed Atlantis in Bolivia,
people placed Atlantis Cuba,
famously near the Bahamas.
Some people said
it's in Indonesia.
It doesn't make any
sense that Atlantis
would exist anywhere
that isn't somewhere
near the Mediterranean.
They're in a naval battle
with Athens in this story.
No one is going to
bring a Navy all the way
from Bolivia to Athens to attack
them in prehistoric Greece.
It's just not going to
happen, so it almost certainly
has to be in the
Mediterranean region.
>>NOORY: And luck would
have it for the Greeks
that something would
happen to Atlantis.
>>ADAMS: Well, yes.
But what people forget sometimes
is that these earthquakes
and floods, they
destroyed Atlantis.
And depending on how
you read the story,
they probably destroyed
Athens as well.
>>NOORY: Now, these
earthquakes, were they natural,
or were they created by man?
>>ADAMS: He doesn't specify.
>>NOORY: He doesn't know that?
He says it was a
day and a night.
The island went
beneath the waves.
He doesn't say it fell to the
bottom of the Atlantic Ocean.
He says it went
beneath the waves.
So to me, looking at the
geophysical evidence,
that sounds a lot more
like an earthquake
followed by a tsunami, which
quite frequently happens.
>>NOORY: A big one.
>>ADAMS: A big tsunami, right.
And there is evidence
in several locations
around the Mediterranean
that this sort of thing
happened in antiquity.
So I think that is
the most likely case
for what happened in the sinking
of whatever was Atlantis.
>>NOORY: When he talks about
the civilization was advanced,
romantically, we all like to
think that the Atlanteans had
flying machines,
and high technology,
and some crystal apparatus
that energized the area.
Is that possible?
>>ADAMS: No.
You hear about
these crystals, you
hear about these
flying machines.
Occasionally you hear about
bubble cities and nuclear power
and things like that.
All of that stuff was
invented in the 19th and early
20th century.
What Plato says--
what I think he
says that indicates that if the
story is real-- that they were
technologically
advanced was they'd
dig these enormous
canals that he mentions.
Not just those circular
ones around the city,
but this enormous
canal around a plane
that would be more than 1,000
miles long, if it were real.
>>NOORY: Which is big.
>>ADAMS: Which is
big, if it's true.
But there's this problem
with numbers in Plato,
whether he intended them
to be taken literally,
or whether he was using them
as symbols of something else.
>>NOORY: Without
Plato's description,
would we know anything
about Atlantis?
>>ADAMS: No, because what Plato
says in the story-- he says,
I got the story.
Well, Socrates
introduces the character
who tells the story, Critias.
And Critias says,
I got this story
from my great, great,
great, great-- I
think it is--
grandfather Solon, who
is a real historic
figure-- lived
around 600 BC-- who we believe
actually did go to Egypt.
Supposedly, the story he heard
was that Solon went to Egypt.
He went to a temple,
and one of the priests
there told him the
story of Atlantis.
And that is our sole source for
the information about Atlantis.
>>NOORY: Nowadays we just put
it on Facebook and Twitter.
>>ADAMS: Exactly, exactly.
But what Critias says was
the priest told Solon, look,
I'm going to change all
the names in this story
into Greek for you.
So the one thing we know
about whatever Atlantis
was, whether it was real
or not, was that it was not
called Atlantis.
So any theory that it's based
on-- this ancient language
has a word that sounds
kind of like Atlantis,
well, that's the only
place it could not be,
because we know it was
not called Atlantis.
>>NOORY: We're going to talk
about four specific locations
that you think Atlantis
might have been
and talk about, of
course, where we would
go to see if we could find it.
But why did they have
such a difficult time
pinpointing where it was
for us in this story?
>>ADAMS: Why does
the evidence not
point to a specific location?
>>NOORY: Then.
>>ADAMS: Then?
When they were telling the story
to Plato, when he picked it up,
why didn't they also
have a location for him?
>>ADAMS: Well, the
interesting thing
is they do give
geographic details that,
in the ancient world,
would have made some sense.
He says it's opposite
the Pillars of Hercules--
or Heracles, as the Greeks
would have called it-- which
is usually interpreted as
the pillars at Gibraltar,
and there's one in
Morocco as well.
>>NOORY: These were
man-made pillars, right?
>>ADAMS: No, no, no.
>>NOORY: No?
>>ADAMS: The Rock of
Gibraltar is 1,400 feet tall.
Imagine being--
>>NOORY: What do they
mean by "the pillars of"?
>>ADAMS: The term means-- it's
like a symbolic spot where,
using Greek mythology,
supposedly Hercules threw
the pillar at Gibraltar
there as a marker back
when he was performing
at the labors.
>>NOORY: But natural?
>>ADAMS: Yeah, but
natural, right.
This was an explanation
for why you get to the end
of the Mediterranean, and at
the mouth of the Mediterranean
you've got beaches,
and then boom,
all of a sudden you've got
this 1,400-foot slab of rock.
Which, if you ever visit,
is absolutely incredible.
It's an amazing one of
the wonders the world.
And the other thing he
says is it was near a place
called Gades.
Now, "Gades" is an
old Phoenician term
that I think means
enclosed city.
And that is how the modern
city of Cadiz in southern Spain
got its name.
It was actually called
Gadira, I think, or Gades.
So that would seem to be
a pretty strong indication
that southern Spain is a good
place to look for Atlantis,
if it really did exist.
But there's also a city called
Agadir in Morocco to the south.
Agadir, the root word
is also Gadira or Gades.
So it's outside the
Pillars of Hercules,
and it's got the same root word.
So that could also
be a candidate.
>>NOORY: All right,
well, let's talk
about some of these four
specific locations, Mark,
and then we'll pinpoint
some of these things
and get your opinion on
where you think it might be.
And let's talk about Gibraltar
first as a possibility.
>>ADAMS: Gibraltar is the
classic clue that Plato gave,
and that's the one
that most people know.
You know the three
big clues are Pillars
of Hercules, sank beneath the
water, and concentric circles.
So Gibraltar, A, number one,
everybody knows what it is.
And if you believe
that when Plato
wrote about the
Pillars of Hercules,
he meant at Gibraltar,
then a candidate
just outside the mouth
of the Mediterranean
makes a lot of sense.
And there are a
lot of people who
think that southern Spain,
where they have found evidence
of an old civilization
there, and there's also
another city that was lost
there called Tartessos, which
is generally believed
to be real and appears
in other ancient sources.
Perhaps those two cities
were the same thing.
Perhaps the city of
Atlantis was actually
the city of Tartessos
under a different name.
>>NOORY: How would
you rate Gibraltar
as the possible
location for Atlantis?
>>ADAMS: I would say
just outside Gibraltar
in an area that's now called
Donana National Park is
a very strong candidate.
If Atlantis turns out you
have been real to some degree,
I would say that is one of
the stronger candidates.
>>NOORY: Give me a percent.
>>ADAMS: I can't give
you a percent, George.
I don't have any
data to work with.
>>NOORY: 80%?
>>ADAMS: But I'll give you
a percent about something
else in a minute.
What is the next candidate?
>>NOORY: Our next
candidate is Malta.
>>ADAMS: Malta.
Malta is probably the
oldest-known Maritime culture
in the Mediterranean.
We know that it was once
completely wiped out--
the entire population-- by
some sort of watery disaster.
It has temples that
are 1,000 years older
than even the great
pyramids of Egypt,
and Plato writes about
these incredible temples
on the island of Atlantis.
Malta, for anyone
who doesn't know,
is an island just off of
the southern part of Italy.
And Malta also
has what are known
as Cart Ruts, which of
these mysterious grooves
dug into the rock of Malta.
You can see them in
the picture there.
And Plato wrote about this
plane with these canals
that we talked about
earlier, and some people
believe that these Cart
Ruts with the canals
that Plato was talking about.
So there's a lot of both
geological and archaeological
information that would
indicate that Malta's
a pretty good candidate.
>>NOORY: The Island
of Santorini.
>>ADAMS: The Island
of Santorini,
which is academia's
favorite, because there's
a lot of what they were consider
solid archaeological evidence
there.
>>NOORY: I keep hearing
that name pop up.
>>ADAMS: Yeah, it's the one-- if
you ever watch a special on TV,
there's a nine out of 10 chance
that their conclusion is going
to be Atlantis was Santorini.
The reason for that
is that we know
there was a huge volcanic
explosion around 1,600 BC
called the Thera explosion.
And a sort of pre-Greek
civilization blew sky high.
It caused a tsunami
that affected
much of the eastern
Mediterranean, wiped
out other cities on the coast.
And most of all,
when it was done,
it was left with this
circular caldera, which,
if you visit there now,
is a circular caldera
with a little island
in the middle.
So it echoes that sort
of concentric circle
look that's one of the
primary clues of where
to find Atlantis.
>>NOORY: And the last location,
Morocco's Atlantic Coast.
>>ADAMS: Well, here's where we
can put a percentage on this,
because I found the
IT specialist in Bonn,
Germany, who took the 51 clues
from Plato's two dialogues,
plugged them into an algorithm--
51 geographic clues--
and came up with the
Souss-Massa Plane
on the Atlantic Coast of
Morocco near the city of Agadir.
And he took me out there,
and it's pretty impressive.
There is a circular formation
which-- can't really
notice until you-- it
looks great on Google Maps,
it's sort of a doughnut shape.
And when you stand above it
and you look into the middle,
there are some sort of
ruins there in the center.
There may have been
a civilization there
thousands of years ago.
>>NOORY: Is it possible that
each four of these locations
might have had
civilizations there that
went down from some calamity?
>>ADAMS: I would
say almost certainly
all four had civilizations
that disappeared
at some point for reasons
we don't fully understand.
>>NOORY: The technology
that they might have had.
Overinflated?
>>ADAMS: Yeah.
I think people tend
to think that Atlantis
was some sort of super city that
you would see out of Star Wars.
>>NOORY: An advanced
civilization.
>>ADAMS: They had laser
guns and cancer cures.
>>NOORY: That they might even
have been extraterrestrials,
right?
>>ADAMS: They might've been.
I've heard that theory as well.
It's talk like that that is
what makes it so difficult
to take Atlantis seriously.
I mean, we've got a
story here that comes
from the most
influential philosopher
in Western civilization,
and yet you're really not
allowed to talk about it
in academia because there's
all this kind of outlandish talk
about technologically advanced
aliens and things like that.
So it kind of gets
away from essentially
what is a treasure map
that Plato gave us.
He gave us dozens and
dozens of interesting clues,
and if we get sidetracked on
this technology, for which
there is absolutely no
evidence whatsoever,
then we miss the really
good Indiana Jones
story that's in there.
>>NOORY: Right under our nose.
>>ADAMS: Yeah, exactly.
>>NOORY: Let's take a look
at what archaeologists
are saying about Atlantis.
>>Marine archaeologist
Claudio Lozano and Morales
are equipped with the
latest in sonar technology.
The torpedo-shaped towfish
generates sound waves
that bounce off the sea floor.
When the signals
return, they're received
by a computer on
deck that converts
the sound waves into images.
Any formation that appears
in the sonar imaging system
is mapped and its
coordinates recorded.
>>We have seen an anomaly,
which is a vertical wall.
This is very different to
a geological formation.
>>Magnifico.
>>It is a vertical structure.
>>Right now, we've
found an anomaly
that is not geological at all.
It's very big, it's very high.
>>Two walls-- one, two.
Completely vertical.
It's very nice.
>>And the shape is not natural.
>>It's attractive.
>>NOORY: Well,
Mark, a little clip
on just what archaeologists
use to try to find things.
How deep is the water in
these locations that we just
talked about?
>>ADAMS: Most of them
are right on the coast,
and I think it
makes a lot of sense
to look for Atlantis
right on the coast
around the Mediterranean.
Because if it was an earthquake
followed by a tsunami
situation, we're
probably not talking
about thousands and thousands
of feet beneath the water.
It's probably dozens, or maybe
100 or a couple hundred feet.
>>NOORY: That wouldn't be
too hard to find, then.
>>ADAMS: It wouldn't
be too hard to find.
But the technology
that we have now known,
as opposed to the
Atlanteans, can see things.
I met the guys who
found the Titanic,
and they told me
they had cameras
they could see a cinder block
under the ocean from a mile
away.
They're using things like lidar
in the jungles of Honduras,
and they just found a couple
years ago this White City
that people have been looking
since the Spanish conquistadors
showed up 500 years ago.
So the technology we
have-- and this has really
powered the people looking
for Atlantis at home.
Things like Google Earth and
the satellite images that were
never available in the past.
People can do serious
work looking for Atlantis
from the comfort of
their own home nowadays.
>>NOORY: What do
we think happened
to the inhabitants of Atlantis?
>>ADAMS: Of Atlantis?
>>NOORY: Did they
all die immediately?
What do you think happened?
Speculation.
>>ADAMS: My reading of what
Plato said-- and it's really
very vague.
A lot of what you have to do
with Plato's interpret very
vague statements-- is that
everybody was wiped out.
Wiped out from the
face of the earth,
and that it was
punishment from the gods.
I think stories and say
the Atlanteans got in boats
and went off and founded
civilizations elsewhere,
I just don't see any
evidence for that.
>>NOORY: Might it have been
involved in the flood of Noah?
>>ADAMS: It's possible that
the flood they'd hit Atlantis,
or whatever inspired
the Atlantis story,
the flood that inspired
the Noah story,
the flooded inspired the
Deucalion story in ancient
Greece--
>>NOORY: It's all
one and the same.
>>ADAMS: --the Epic of
Gilgamesh, famously the oldest
known writing in the world.
It could all be
the same story, it
could all be related stories.
There is a guy who I met,
an archaeologist out in New
Mexico, who has looked at
all of the ancient myths
and found these many
similarities between these,
and he thinks it might've been a
comet that landed in the Indian
Ocean around 2807 BC.
>>NOORY: Ah, creating
a huge tsunami?
>>ADAMS: Exactly, exactly.
And they went to
Madagascar and they
look for these-- what
they call chevrons, which
would've been essentially huge
splashes up the sides of hills
there.
And there's some pretty
compelling evidence
that something could've
landed in the Indian Ocean
around 2,800 BC.
>>NOORY: And there's a
message there for us, Mark,
because if it happened
then, it could happen today.
>>ADAMS: Well, remember, when
Plato's writing the Atlantis
story, it's part of a
larger dialogue called
the Timaeus, which is
his attempt to explain
the nature of the universe.
And what he's saying is Greek
society is destroyed again
and again and again.
It's destroyed by comets,
and floods, and pestilence,
and no matter how
high we get now,
we're going to be taken down
again by some sort of disaster.
>>NOORY: That's no doubt.
>>ADAMS: Yeah.
No matter how big
you think you are,
you're going to get
knocked down at some point.
>>NOORY: Now, do you have any
doubts that Atlantis existed?
>>ADAMS: Yes, I do have many
doubts that Atlantis existed.
>>NOORY: You do have doubts?
>>ADAMS: Absolutely.
>>NOORY: Tell me.
>>ADAMS: I spent three
years thinking about this.
And Plato famously wrote in "The
Republic," probably the most
famous book in
Western civilization,
there are stories
that are true, there
are stories that
are false, and there
are stories that are false,
but have truth in them.
And I think the
Atlantis story is
a story that is true, but
has a lot of falsity in it.
I think Plato may
have taken stories
that he heard from
Carthaginians sailors, that
may have been passed down,
even through Solon via Egypt.
I think that's a perfectly
sensible scenario,
that he might have
gotten information there.
And he may have put
all these together
for the purpose of
teaching his students
at the first
university, the academy
that he established in Athens.
We have to remember he
wasn't telling this story
to excite people in 2016.
He was trying to teach a
bunch of guys sitting around
in Athens around 360 BC.
So I think we would
have to find two
things if we wanted to believe
that Atlantis had been real.
If you wanted to see it on the
front page of the "New York
Times," you would either have
to find some sort of inscription
in a temple in Egypt,
which is not impossible.
Although they've been
looking for a long time,
but they keep finding
new things there.
Or you would have to find a
combination of those three
big clues.
You'd have to find the
concentric circles,
it would have to be a
city that was wiped out
by a watery disaster,
and it would
have to be opposite
something that could qualify
as the Pillars of Hercules.
>>NOORY: Well, and
we have historically
found locations of
cities that have
sunk because of some
catastrophes or some episode.
>>ADAMS: Absolutely.
There is a city called Helike
in the southern part of Greece
on the Peloponnesos that
nobody doubts actually
sank during Plato's
lifetime, around 373 BC.
And there are archaeologists
there right now looking
for evidence of Helike.
And if they find it, it's going
to be like King Tut times 10.
You're talking about a
golden age of Greece-- city
with all the temples
and all the statues
and everything that
was just buried
by a tsunami or some other
kind of flood overnight
and is under the silt
there in southern Greece.
If they find this
thing, it's going
to be absolutely extraordinary.
>>NOORY: Let's take a look
at some of the searches
for these sunken cities.
>>This is Cancho Roano,
one of the greatest
archaeological discoveries
of the 20th century.
The 1970s and 1980s,
archaeologists
discovered a series
of different villages
that preserve Tartessan culture.
This Tartessan culture
was so different than all
the other culture around it.
It was the culture of the South.
>>Freund believes Tartessan
culture was really Atlantean
culture, but these
2,500-year-old ruins are 125
miles from the coast--
a long way from home.
>>Why did they come here?
Some cataclysmic
event on the coast
pushed them out of their
homes in the ninth century.
>>Freund believes
this place is not
the remains of a
once-bustling village.
Rather, it's a memorial to
the lost kingdom of Atlantis.
He calls it a ritual
city, and says
this site is actually a
miniature replica of Atlantis
built in homage.
>>NOORY: Mark,
isn't it fascinating
how some of these theories
can just keep popping up?
>>ADAMS: Oh, they pop
up again and again.
I was able to figure
out that more hypotheses
for the location of Atlantis
have come up in the last 10
years than in the previous
2,400 years combined.
And I think that will
probably continue
to grow over the next 10 years.
>>NOORY: What it also tells me
is what a violent planet we've
had with these calamities.
>>ADAMS: Absolutely.
I think it's two things.
One, people want to solve
what may be the greatest
mystery of all time if
somebody found Atlantis,
they would be famous overnight.
And the other thing is that
idea that civilizations
come and civilizations go,
and when they're riding high,
they don't see the end coming.
But it is coming.
It comes for all
this in the end,
and Atlantis is a
perfect example of that.
>>NOORY: So, though, you have
these doubts about whether this
is real or not.
You also have those
thoughts that maybe it is.
>>ADAMS: Absolutely.
At the end, I thought
there's a lot of evidence
here that Plato
based this on what
he believed to be real stories.
Whether we can go
back and find out
what Plato believed to be
true, was actually true,
that's another question.
But it does seem to match
up with certain things
in the archaeological
record, in written history
from that time that
indicates that he
may have been basing this on
stories he believed to be true.
>>NOORY: Emails in,
Jessie from Atlanta.
"How did you get
interested in Atlantis?"
>>ADAMS: You know, when I was
writing my book about Machu
Picchu, I was going
through microfilm,
and came across the front
page story in the newspaper.
>>NOORY: Microfilm?
What's microfilm?
>>ADAMS: I know, 2/3 of
the audience is like, what?
I came across a
front page newspaper
story that says "German
Finds Atlantis in Africa"
from 1911, around the time
Machu Picchu was found--
the great era of exploration.
And I thought, people
are looking for Atlantis?
I thought Atlantis was just
something for Saturday morning
cartoons.
But the more I got
into it, the more
I realized that people
had seen that someone
had been able to take and the
myth of Troy in "The Iliad"
from Homer.
And in the 1870s, Heinrich
Schliemann, the German,
had famously used the
clues from that myth
to find the actual city of Troy,
and suddenly all bets were off.
And people are
like, well, maybe we
can use the clues from
the Atlantis story
to find Atlantis.
And I thought, well,
are there people
out there looking for it?
And the more I
looked, the more I
realized there are a
lot of people looking
for Atlantis pretty seriously.
>>NOORY: They really are
desperately obsessed with this.
>>ADAMS: Absolutely, it
becomes an obsession.
And I can relate to that.
I became pretty obsessed
with finding it.
>>NOORY: Will you feel
satisfied if they find Atlantis?
>>ADAMS: Oh, no one
will be more delighted.
>>NOORY: Not disappointed?
Because sometimes the
mystery of where it is
is just as exciting as
the actual discovery.
>>ADAMS: I know, and it is
one of those things where
I think life needs a
little bit of mystery.
It seems like every year we
have a little bit less mystery.
But at the same
time, can you imagine
if they found an inscription
in a temple in Egypt
that matched Plato's story?
>>NOORY: It would be amazing.
>>ADAMS: It would be like, oh
my god, this is incredible.
>>NOORY: It would also
tell you that stories
of historical events that
are handed down to us,
whether it's in the
Bible or Plato, are real.
>>ADAMS: Yeah, and
that's one of the things
the Plato was struggling with
when he wrote this story.
Written history was
less than 100 years old.
Herodotus had started what
we know as written history
less than 100 years earlier.
So written history is
basically a new technology
that Plato uses the
character of Socrates
to argue about in his dialogues.
And he comes down
on the side of you
know what, I have my doubts
about written history
because you can't poke
it, you can't quit it.
I think oral history
in the form of myth,
whether it's true myth, or false
myth, or somewhere in between,
is superior to
written history, which
is a very different attitude
from what we have today.
>>NOORY: Another email in.
This from Carl in Malibu.
"Do you believe in Edgar
Cayce's Atlantis predictions
on the underwater ruins
that might have been
found in the Bahamas-- Bimini?"
>>ADAMS: I am extremely
skeptical about Edward Cayce's
predictions about Bimini.
Everything I've seen
coming out of Bimini
has shown me almost
no correlation
with Plato's original
Atlantis story.
>>NOORY: But something there.
>>ADAMS: There's
something there,
but it appears to be some
sort of natural formation
under the water.
Which, in itself,
might be interesting.
>>NOORY: They're not roads?
>>ADAMS: The Bimini Road?
No, that seems to be
a natural formation.
And Plato doesn't write
about roads anyway.
He gives dozens and
dozens of clues,
but he mentions
nothing about a road.
>>NOORY: Can we even speculate
on what the population might've
been on Atlantis?
>>ADAMS: If Plato's
numbers were real,
then it had to be
huge, because he
talks about a naval force
of more than a million men.
But that's where you
get into the area
of whether he intended these
numbers to be taken literally.
I think the number
of the invasion
force it came into Normandy
on D-day was 156,000.
So you're going to get
more than a million guys
to come from elsewhere in the
Mediterranean to attack Athens?
It starts to beggar
belief a little bit.
>>NOORY: I want you to
paint a picture for us
for a moment, Mark.
I want you to paint a picture
that all these people are
on this island, thriving.
And then whatever this calamity
is hits them like that.
What's happening?
>>ADAMS: I think
what's happening
there is the same thing that
happens in Indonesian the day
after Christmas of 2004.
Same thing we saw
happen in Fukushima.
Complete and utter panic.
You're being hit
by a wall of water.
>>NOORY: Do you see it coming?
Do you have time to prepare?
>>ADAMS: Oh, I don't think
so, although it's interesting.
There are all these
stories from antiquity,
and people still tell
these stories today.
But we talked about that city
in ancient Greece around 373
that disappeared.
And in ancient
accounts, they say--
and you hear this
again and again--
all the animals ran for higher
ground before the tsunami came.
So perhaps there is
some truth to that.
There certainly seems to be
some folk wisdom behind it.
But I think if it happened,
the destruction of whatever
the original city
of Atlantis was
would have been immediate and a
complete and utter catastrophe.
>>NOORY: And the force
must've been so strong
that it could sink this island.
>>ADAMS: Well, we actually
have a modern analog to this.
If what happened happened
just outside of Gibraltar,
it was quite likely
the result of a shift
in what's called the
Azores-Gibraltar Transform
Fault, which causes a huge
earthquake roughly every 350
to 400 years.
It destroyed the city
of Agadir in Morocco
near where somebody thinks
Atlantis was located in 1960.
Obliterated the city.
And in 1755, it hit the capital
of Portugal-- it hit Lisbon,
and we have accounts of this.
And it was just
absolute annihilation.
The city was
completely wiped out.
And you can still see
the few structures
that were left in Lisbon
from the 1755 earthquake.
But if you read
the accounts today,
they're absolutely terrifying.
>>NOORY: A marine
biologist an archaeologist
discovered some things
around Alexandria in Egypt
back in 2000.
Let's take a quick
look at that clip.
So what are we
looking at here, Mark?
What are we seeing?
>>ADAMS: This is some
statuary and maybe
some buildings from
what was believed
to be the ancient city of
Alexandria, which was founded
by Alexander the Great after he
conquered much the known world.
>>NOORY: Might this
have been the library?
>>ADAMS: I don't think so.
That the story about the
library is that supposedly,
on either one or two
occasions, its contents
were destroyed,
perhaps by burning.
And of course, for
those who don't know,
the Library of Alexandria,
it was this repository
of all the great knowledge of
the ancient world written down
on scrolls that was
destroyed at a certain point,
and maybe the answer
to the Atlantis story
was held in that
library of Alexandria.
Well, they've found some great
things just off of Egypt there,
and they're still pulling
things out at Heracleion,
which is where this was taken.
Just amazing stuff
under the water there.
>>NOORY: So the fact that
these coastal cities have sunk
tells me one of two things.
A calamity like a
tsunami pulls them down.
Or sea levels rose for some
reason and flooded them out.
>>ADAMS: Right.
I think what we're
looking at with cities
along the Mediterranean coast
is more of a gradual sea level
rise.
But as somebody pointed out
to me, when you build a city,
you build it where a
river hits the sea.
If the sea rises 20 feet
over 5,000 years or whatever,
you're going to lose
all those cities.
And a lot of those
cities are yet
to be discovered
under the water there.
They're probably under
silt and whatnot.
There is a lot of talk that
Plato said Atlantis sank,
it would agree
with roughly 9,600
BC, which happens to be
around the time of the end
of the last great ice age.
So people think, oh, well,
the glaciers started melting,
and there was all this
water, and it sank the city.
But the glacial melt is
much like the glacial melt
now that's occurring
with climate change.
It's very gradual.
So unless it was a breaching of
something like the Black Sea--
and that's one theory, that
the Black Sea was breached,
and that inspired
the story-- there's
no real correlation with a
sudden destruction of an island
city and the end of the
ice age around 9,600 BC.
>>NOORY: Serena from Ohio
does want to ask you this.
"Did aliens build Atlantis?"
>>ADAMS: There is no
evidence that aliens
were involved in the
construction of Atlantis.
>>NOORY: Now, this you've
probably just touched.
Kramer from Arizona
talks about, "Did Plato
say that Atlantis sank around
the time of the last ice age?"
>>ADAMS: Yes.
The end of the last
ice age is roughly,
I think, 9700 BC it begins.
There is some evidence
in Plato that Atlantis
sank around 9,600 BC.
So those two figures
seem to be very close,
but that's if you're taking
Plato's numbers literally.
And as we talked about
earlier, if you're
taking Plato's
numbers literally,
then Atlantis had a navy of
1.2 million men in 9600 BC.
And that would be a significant
percentage of the population
of the Mediterranean would
be in the Atlantean navy
around that time.
So you have to start to look
more closely Plato's numbers
and try to understand
what is he actually trying
to do with these number here.
>>NOORY: What this
tells me, Mark,
is that historically
this planet has
gone through all
kinds of cataclysms.
Things have happened
here, whether there
were asteroids that
struck, earthquakes that
created tsunamis, volcanoes.
Extremely active planet done
over the thousands of years.
Are we lucky today
that we haven't
seen one of these things
happen, because we are so
tied in the coastal
cities now, and areas.
I mean, these places
would all be wiped out.
>>ADAMS: Sure.
As a lot of people have pointed
out, of the city of Miami
could be the next Atlantis.
The city of Miami is slowly
sinking as we speak here,
and there are things like
super volcanoes, and comets,
and asteroids that-- look
at the end of the dinosaurs
65 million years ago.
>>NOORY: Bang.
>>ADAMS: Bang.
The Tambora volcano
just 200 years ago
was a year-- it wiped out the
summer for the entire planet,
basically.
We missed an entire
year of growth.
These things do happen.
And as Plato-- I think this
was a big part of his message
was saying, look, you don't
have control over as much
as you think you
have control over.
Civilizations get hit and
destroyed again and again
and again.
Time is cyclical.
>>NOORY: Look at Pompeii.
Look what happened to them.
>>ADAMS: You look at Pompeii,
look at the people who
are in Santorini.
Again and again,
civilizations are destroyed.
>>NOORY: Do some of
them have the ability
to get on little
boats and escape,
or is it too late for that, too?
>>ADAMS: I guess it would depend
on what kind of boats they had
and what kind of
warning they had.
>>NOORY: And where
would they go?
>>ADAMS: And where
would they go, sure.
I mean, if you're
being hit by a tsunami,
do you suddenly get in
a boat and sail off?
I don't know, I've
never been in a tsunami.
>>NOORY: And are you welcome to
this other location you show up
at?
>>ADAMS: There's no
evidence whatsoever
from Plato's original story
that anybody from Atlantis
went anywhere.
None.
>>NOORY: Do you think we'll
ever get these answers?
>>ADAMS: I'm pretty dubious.
And one reason why is if you
look at the Mediterranean
from an archaeological
perspective,
it's sort of heartbreaking,
because you realize that
whatever the original
inspiration for the Atlantis
story was is likely under some
luxury 36-hole golf course now.
So a lot of things
have been ripped off
the bottom of the
Mediterranean Sea floor,
or bulldozed over to make a
condo complex or something.
So we'll never know
what we don't know.
>>NOORY: Why does
humankind want to imagine
that Atlantis was huge?
>>ADAMS: Because it
was a golden age.
Everybody has nostalgia
deep in their heart.
They like to look
back to a golden age.
Things were better before
we had the internet,
or things were better when
we all ate paleo diets,
and things were always
better way back when.
And Atlantis is
like a blank screen
onto which we can project
whatever we want it to be.
And that's why there are so
many different interpretations
of Atlantis.
If you want it to be a
technologically sophisticated
civilization, that's
what you think.
If you want to think that
aliens came from the planet Xenu
and created Atlantis, that's
when you're going to thank.
But to me, it's just so
much more interesting
to look at the clues in the
original story that Plato gave,
which is, like I said, it's
essentially a treasure map.
And if you look hard
enough, you can see
where the X might have been.
And to me, that's much more
interesting than speculation.
>>NOORY: When might
it have happened?
>>ADAMS: Well, there's
a lot of theories.
I think what makes the most
sense is that whatever happened
to inspire the story of Atlantis
was probably something related
to what we call the end of the
Late Bronze Age, which happened
in the late 12th century
BC and prior to that.
Somehow there was a series
of earthquakes, famines, mass
migrations in the
Mediterranean area.
And we have sources
for this from
various ancient
civilizations-- myths
that have been passed down.
And I think it makes
sense that whatever
inspired the story probably
happened in that span
around 1200 BC.
Interestingly, there is
one eminent Atlantologist
who works at a
university in Greece who
has shown that if you
take that figure of 9600
BC, but using lunar years as
were used in Egypt sometimes
and redo the math, it
comes out to 1200 BC.
So perhaps if you were using
a lunar calendar rather than
a solar calendar, the
number works out that way.
>>NOORY: Part of the
myth is that it happened
30,000 years ago, that they
want to Central America,
they went to Egypt,
and they fled and went
to different regions.
>>ADAMS: Well, that can all be
traced back to a single source
as well, which is
Ignatius Donnelly in 1882.
He's this flamboyant
Minnesota congressman
who sits down at his desk at
his failed housing project
that he's put together
far from Minneapolis,
and he's trying to
rebuild his life.
And what he says
is, OK, they just
found Troy using
ancient knowledge.
I'm going to pull together every
single scrap of ancient history
and try to prove that Atlantis
was the beginning of all
these ancient civilizations.
And if you go back and
look at it, some of it
makes some sense, and
some of it is just crazy.
But unfortunately, that has
been passed down from generation
to generation, and
a lot of people
take that as the original story.
>>NOORY: Why did Atlantis
have enemies during that time?
>>ADAMS: Why did
Atlantis have enemies?
Well, why does any
civilization have enemies?
>>NOORY: They wanted something.
People wanted something.
>>ADAMS: Well, I think in
the story that Plato tells,
Atlantis is invading
Athens, and Athens
rescues the rest of
the Mediterranean,
protects the rest
of Mediterranean.
If you want to translate
it into Star Wars terms,
Athens is the evil
empire, and-- I'm sorry,
Atlantis is the evil empire,
and Athens are the rebels,
and they're there
to rescue everyone
from the invading
powers of Atlantis.
A lot of that is interpretation,
so until we have more evidence,
we can't really know.
>>NOORY: If that's
true, could everything
that happened to Atlantis
have been God's will?
>>ADAMS: Now you're
getting into an area that's
far above my pay grade, George.
>>NOORY: And also
there's speculation
that they were nuked.
That's another possibility.
With some kind of
high technology.
>>ADAMS: I would say the
chances that Atlantis
was nuked are very,
very, very slim.
>>NOORY: Might they have been
hit directly by an asteroid?
>>ADAMS: I would say there's a
chance that whatever the island
civilization was that inspired
the Atlantis story was
destroyed by a comet or asteroid
or something that hit the ocean
and caused a flood
somewhere, I think
that's absolutely possible.
>>NOORY: So in your opinion,
was Atlantis real or not?
I know you said you had doubts.
But if you had to put
it all on the line?
>>ADAMS: If I had to
put it all on the line,
I would put it in a book--
>>NOORY: Called "Meet
Me in Atlantis."
>>ADAMS: --and sell that book
so I could pay my mortgage.
That's as close as I'll say.
>>NOORY: Books don't make
big mortgage payments.
>>ADAMS: Well, it depends.
I would say the
story of Atlantis
was probably based, at least
in part, on real events.
>>NOORY: On real events?
>>ADAMS: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Something
happened somewhere.
>>ADAMS: I think the
story of Atlantis,
especially the numbers
in the story of Atlantis,
deserves a lot closer study.
And it isn't getting
that study now
because most academics consider
it to be a fringe subject.
I think if people took a
closer look at the numbers
in Plato's story, and people
did a lot more interpretation
of the original myth,
we might find ourselves
closer to an original truth.
>>NOORY: And with
all these discoveries
of some of these ancient
cities that have sunk,
is it conceivable we've
already found Atlantis?
>>ADAMS: It is conceivable.
It's conceivable.
I would say the thing
that has been found
or might have been found that
most closely parallels Atlantis
would be the culture of
Tartessos in southern Spain.
And there are reputable
sources-- Aristotle,
Herodotus-- who
mention Tartessos.
So historians, archaeologists,
anthropologists,
they generally believe that
there was a Tartessian culture,
and they have found artifacts
and things like that.
What they have not found
is a rock-solid location
for that original
city of Tartessos.
If they found that,
then you could
do a more serious comparison
between Tartessos and the clues
that Plato gives in the
original Atlantis story,
and you might have a match.
>>NOORY: Are there many
archaeologists desperately
trying to find Atlantis?
>>ADAMS: No, there are
very few archaeologists
looking for Atlantis right
now, because it's not
taken seriously as a subject.
If you're someone who says, I'm
going out to look for Atlantis,
as an archaeologist, you'll get
kicked out of the department.
>>NOORY: Why?
>>ADAMS: Because it's
considered a fringe subject.
Because so many
people have come up
with crazy theories
over the years, and in--
>>NOORY: It's one of the most
exciting subjects out there.
>>ADAMS: I know, and
it comes from Plato,
who is one of the great thinkers
of Western civilization,
and he gives all this detail.
And as somebody told
me, Plato is probably
the most difficult philosopher
in Western civilization.
And the numbers in his dialogues
are the most difficult part
of Plato's work.
But no one has really
dug into these numbers
in Atlantis seriously.
A few people have, but not much.
And I think there might be so
much more there to be found.
And once these numbers are
looked at a lot more closely,
we may have a completely
different perspective
on Atlantis 10, 20,
30 years from now.
>>NOORY: Mark, thanks
for being on the program.
Really appreciate it.
>>ADAMS: George,
it's such a pleasure.
Thanks for having me.
>>NOORY: I have been
obsessed, like you have,
with finding Atlantis
since I was a little boy.
I never went out
searching, but thank
God we have books like
"Meet Me in Atlantis,"
because it's like a
roadmap to discovery.
I'm George Noory.
This is "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]